Training LLMs like OLMo on massive amounts of text relies heavily on data parallelism: the ability to learn from many text documents at once. But data parallelism is bottlenecked by batch size: the number of documents used for each gradient step during training. This means it’s important to train LLMs with a large batch size if you want training to finish in a reasonable amount of time. On the other hand, training with a batch size too large can degrade the performance achievable by training on a fixed amount of data, since larger batches can show diminishing return in their ability to reduce loss. Thus, in practice, it is important to pick a batch size that balances these two concerns, allowing a high degree of data parallelism but not degrading performance.

Such a batch size that balances data parallelism and token efficiency is known as the critical batch size (CBS) in the literature. In practice, when training LLMs, it is useful to have a method to measure the CBS in advance before launching a pretraining run. There are existing ways to do this (most notably, measuring the CBS via a noise scale proxy), but, while applying these ideas to OLMo, we found fundamental problems that make them hard to trust. 
The CBS was introduced by McCandlish et al. (2018) as a batch size representing a reasonable tradeoff between data parallelism and token efficiency: i.e., a batch size that is large enough to speed up training, but not too large to degrade final performance. Following this idea, we state the CBS hypothesis as follows in our paper:

There is some critical batch size B* up to which increasing the batch size (and appropriately modifying the learning rate) approximately preserves the loss trajectory as a function of tokens trained, but, above which, the loss trajectory degrades.

As illustrated in the figure below, we broadly find that, indeed, there is a B* below which models achieve roughly the same loss, but, above which, loss degrades. Thus, in order to increase data parallelism, we can increase our batch size to B* (and scale the learning rate). But this is only practical if we have some way to measure the CBS B* before launching a training run. 

Larger gradient noise scale means there is more variation in the gradient between different examples in the batch. As argued by McCandlish et al. (2018), more noise means that the batch size can be increased larger without having a major effect on the optimization trajcetory, since small-batch steps will be noisy anyway, and aggregating them together is required to take a step in the right direction. Thus, according to McCandlish et al., we can measure the gradient noise scale and use it as a proxy for the CBS.

Practically, this idea is appealing for several reasons. First, McCandlish et al. show how gradient noise scale can be estimated efficiently using gradient norms, which we would likely compute anyway when training an LLM. Second, McCandlish et al. present a formal argument for how, under certain assumptions, gradient noise scale should be a proxy for the CBS. This inspired some practical adoption of the gradient noise scale, e.g., in pretraining GPT-3.

